3.2 What Happened to Weavers?



The consolidation of East India Company power after the 1760s did not initially lead to a decline in
textile exports from India. British cotton industries had not yet expanded and Indian fine textiles
were in great demand in Europe. So the company was keen on expanding textile exports from India.

Before establishing political power in Bengal and Carnatic in the 1760s and 1770s, the East India
Company had found it difficult to ensure a regular supply of goods for export. The French, Dutch,
Portuguese as well as the local traders competed in the market to secure woven cloth. So the weaver
and supply merchants could bargain and try selling the produce to the best buyer. In their letters
back to London, Company officials continuously complained of difficulties of supply and the high
prices.

However, once the East India Company established political power, it could assert a monopoly right
to trade. It proceeded to develop a system of management and control that would eliminate
competition, control costs, and ensure regular supplies of cotton and silk goods. This it did
through a series of steps.

First: the Company tried to eliminate the existing traders and brokers connected with the cloth
trade, and establish a more direct control over the weaver. It appointed a paid servant called the
gomastha to supervise weavers, collect supplies, and examine the quality of cloth.

Second: it prevented Company weavers from dealing with other buyers. One way of doing this was
through the system of advances.

Once an order was placed, the weavers were given loans to purchase the raw material for their
production. Those who took loans had to hand over the cloth they produced to the gomastha. They
could not take it to any other trader.

As loans flowed in and the demand for fine textiles expanded, weavers eagerly took the advances,
hoping to earn more. Many weavers had small plots of land which they had earlier cultivated along
with weaving, and the produce from this took care of their family needs. Now they had to lease out
the land and devote all their time to weaving. Weaving, in fact, required the labour of the entire
family, with children and women all engaged in different stages of the process.

Soon, however, in many weaving villages there were reports of clashes between weavers and gomasthas.
Earlier supply merchants had very often lived within the weaving villages, and had a close
relationship with the weavers, looking after their needs and helping them in times of crisis. The
new gomasthas were outsiders, with no long-term social link with the village. They acted arrogantly,
marched into villages with sepoys and peons, and punished weavers for delays in supply â€“ often
beating and flogging them. The weavers lost the space to bargain for prices and sell to different
buyers: the price they received from the Company was miserably low and the loans they had accepted
tied them to the Company. the word sipahi, meaning an Indian soldier in the service of the British
In many places in Carnatic and Bengal, weavers deserted villages and migrated, setting up looms in
other villages where they had some family relation. Elsewhere, weavers along with the village
traders revolted, opposing the Company and its officials. Over time many weavers began refusing
loans, closing down their workshops and taking to agricultural labour.

By the turn of the nineteenth century, cotton weavers faced a new set of problems.