2 Print Comes to Europe



For centuries, silk and spices from China flowed into Europe through the silk route. In the eleventh
century, Chinese paper reached Europe via the same route. Paper made possible the production of
manuscripts, carefully written by scribes. Then, in 1295, Marco Polo, a great explorer, returned to
Italy after many years of exploration in China. As you read above, China already had the technology
of woodblock printing. Marco Polo brought this knowledge back with him. Now Italians began producing
books with woodblocks, and soon the technology spread to other parts of Europe. Luxury editions were
still handwritten on very expensive vellum, meant for aristocratic circles and rich monastic
libraries which scoffed at printed books as cheap vulgarities. Merchants and students in the
university towns bought the cheaper printed copies.

As the demand for books increased, booksellers all over Europe began exporting books to many
different countries. Book fairs were held at different places. Production of handwritten manuscripts
was also organised in new ways to meet the expanded demand. Scribes or skilled handwriters were no
longer solely employed by wealthy or influential patrons but increasingly by booksellers as well.
More than 50 scribes often worked for one bookseller.

But the production of handwritten manuscripts could not satisfy the ever-increasing demand for
books. Copying was an expensive, laborious and time-consuming business. Manuscripts were fragile,
awkward to handle, and could not be carried around or read easily.

Their circulation therefore remained limited. With the growing demand for books, woodblock printing
gradually became more and more popular. By the early fifteenth century, woodblocks were being widely
used in Europe to print textiles, playing cards, and religious pictures with simple, brief texts.

There was clearly a great need for even quicker and cheaper reproduction of texts. This could only
be with the invention of a new print technology. The breakthrough occurred at Strasbourg, Germany,
where Johann Gutenberg developed the first-known printing press in the 1430s. you have seen there.
of animals The Jikji of Korea is among the worldâ€™s oldest existing books printed with movable metal
type.

It contains the essential features of Zen Buddhism. About 150 monks of India, China and Korea are
mentioned in the book. It was printed in late 14th century. While the first volume of the book is
unavailable, the second one is available in the National Library of France. This work marked an
important technical change in the print culture. That is why it was inscribed on the UNESCO Memory
of the World Register in 2001. pressed onto the back of the paper to get the impression from the
type. At one time it used to be a wooden board; later it was made of steel