NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT



to be different. Discuss among yourselves on what India should do for development.

Most likely, you would find that different students in the class have given different answers to the
above question.

In fact, you might yourself think of many different answers and not be too sure of any of these. It
is very important to keep in mind that different persons could have different as well as conflicting
notions of a countryâ€™s development.

However, can all the ideas be considered equally important? Or, if there are conflicts how does one
decide? What would be a fair and just path for all? We also have to think whether there is a better
way of doing things. Would the idea benefit a large number of people or only a small NATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT Discuss the following situations: 1. Look at
the picture on the right. What should be the developmental goals for such an area? 2. Read this
newspaper report and answer the If even the idea of what constitutes development can be varied and
conflicting, then certainly there can be differences about ways of developing. If you know of any
such controversy, try to find out arguments advanced by different people. You may do so by talking
to different persons or you may find it from newspapers and television. (i) Who are the people who
benefited and who did not? (ii) What should be the developmental goal for this country? 3. What can
be some of the developmental goals for your village, town or locality? A vessel dumped 500 tonnes of
liquid toxic wastes into open-air dumps in a city and in the surrounding sea. This happened in a
city called Abidjan in Ivory Coast, a country in Africa. The fumes from the highly toxic waste
caused nausea, skin rashes, fainting, diarrhoea etc. After a month seven persons were dead, twenty
in hospital and twenty six thousand treated for symptoms of poisoning.

A multinational company dealing in petroleum and metals had contracted a local company of the Ivory
Coast to dispose the toxic waste from its ship.

UNDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT
OPMENT OPMENT You might ask if development can mean different things, how come some countries are
generally called developed and others under- developed? Before we come to this, let us consider
another question.

When we compare different things, they could have similarities as well as differences. Which aspects
do we use to compare them? Let us look at students in the class itself. How do we compare different
students? They differ in their height, health, talents and interests. The healthiest student may not
be the most studious one.

The most intelligent student may not be the friendliest one. So, how do we compare students? The
criterion we may use depends on the purpose of comparison. We use different criterion to choose a
sports team, a debate team, a music team or a team to organise a picnic. Still, if for some purpose,
we have to choose the criterion for the all-round progress of children in the class, how shall we do
it? Usually we take one or more important characteristics of persons and compare them based on these
characteristics. Of course, there can be differences about what are important characteristics that
should form the basis of comparison: friendliness and spirit of cooperation, creativity or marks
secured? This is true of development too.

For comparing countries, their income is considered to be one of the most important attributes.

Countries with higher income are more developed than others with less income. This is based on the
understanding that more income means more of all things that human beings need. Whatever people
like, and should have, they will be able to get with greater income. So, greater income itself is
considered to be one important goal.

Now, what is the income of a country? Intuitively, the income of the country is the income of all
the residents of the country. This gives us the total income of the country.

However, for comparison between countries, total income is not such an useful measure. Since,
countries have different populations, comparing total income will not tell us what an average person
is likely to earn. Are people in one country better off than others in a different country? Hence,
we compare the average income which is the total income of the country divided by its total
population. The average income is also called per capita income.

In World Development Reports, brought out by the World Bank, this criterion is used in classifying
countries. Countries with per capita income of US$ 63,400 per annum and above in 2023, are called
high income or rich countries and those with per capita income of about US$ 2400 or less are called
low-income countries. India comes in the category of low middle income countries because its per
capita income in 2023 was just about US$ 10030 per annum. The rich countries, excluding countries of
Middle East and certain other small countries, are generally called developed countries.